#muziek #schrijven

Hi all,
As it seems, I am the one who is going to be the Support Engineer for the coming sprint and since I won't be present tomorrow when it starts, I'll announce the new name before someone else sneaks in and steals the opportunity. It is going to be: As Heard on Radio Soulwax
I thought that titles of music albums might be a good theme to follow, so I went over to my cd collection (I am old enough to have one) and started at the top left to see what that would look like. The first album started off well right away. It is from 2ManyDJ's, two guys from Belgium that also formed a rock band called Soulwax. As heard on.... is a mix album, which normally isn't really my kind of thing. But this one is interesting, as it was (one of the) first commercially available mix albums that contained a lot of mashups. (A mashup is the art of creating a whole new song by playing (parts of) two or more completely unrelated existing songs together at the same time.) This album has a lot of them and it contains many surprising combinations, both from obscure and well known artists. (Well known in certain circles, at least.) They say the real heroes of this record are actually not the two DJ's, but the people behind the scenes that managed to get copyright clearance on all these songs.
Many older Dutch colleagues will recognize this part, as it was played non-stop on the Dutch radio at the time. It is a combination of 10cc's Dreadlock Holiday (reggae) and Independent Women from Destiny's Child (a girl band), but there are other nice ones too.
I still remember listening to it with some friends, trying to one-up each other on the amount songs we recognized. I lost big time, but I was still happy, because I discovered a lot of new bands through this record. For instance: Electric Six with Danger! High Voltage, which would definitely have been my entry for the list of drugs enhanced video clips. Other examples are Peaches, Jeans Team (here Peaches covering a Jeans Team song for maximum efficiency), Queen of Japan (covering I was made for Loving You from KISS) and... oh, the list is endless. (edited) 

